Proto-cities built from 6200 years ago in eastern Europe upend our ideas about when civilisation began and why people made the move from rural to urban living

Stuart Mcreath
AROUND 6200 years ago, farmers living on the eastern fringes of Europe, in what is now Ukraine, did something inexplicable. They left their neolithic villages and moved into a sparsely inhabited area of forest and steppe. There, in an area roughly the size of Belgium between the modern cities of Kiev and Odessa, they congregated at new settlements up to 20 times the size of their old ones.

This enigmatic culture, known as the Cucuteni-Trypillia, predates the earliest known cities in Mesopotamia, a civilisation that spanned part of the Middle East, and in China. It persisted for 800 years, but then, as mysteriously as it had begun, this experiment in civilisation failed. The inhabitants left the lightest of footprints in the landscape, and no human remains have been found. “Not a pinkie, not a tooth,” says palaeogeneticist Alexey Nikitin at Grand Valley State University in Michigan.

This puzzling lack of evidence has fuelled a lively debate about what Nikitin calls the “Dark Ages” of European prehistory. “You talk to five Trypillian archaeologists, you get five different opinions,” he says.

But the data gap hasn’t stifled interest – quite the opposite. Several projects in recent years have tried to make sense of the Trypillian proto-cities. Despite big disagreements, what is emerging is a picture of an early and unique attempt at urbanisation. It may be the key to understanding how modern Europe emerged from the Stone Age – and even throw new light on the emergence of human civilisation in general.

Uruk and Tell Brak, which arose in Mesopotamia early in the 4th millennium BC, are usually considered the world’s first cities. Their excavated remains point to an increased density of habitation and a novel, hierarchical social structure – two features that are considered integral to the definition of a city. The idea is that as human populations grew, strangers had to come together in a shared space and get along. “I think that was the real psychological threshold of urbanism,” says Monica Smith at the University of California, Los Angeles, an anthropologist and author of Cities: The first 6,000 years. But the Trypillian megasites don’t meet either of those criteria, so how should we make sense of them?

Ukrainian archaeologists have known about the megasites for more than a century, but systematic excavations didn’t get under way until after the second world war, and the sites only came to international attention a decade ago. Today, of the several thousand known Trypillian settlements, around 15 count as “mega” because they cover more than 1 square kilometre. The biggest, Taljanki, is over three times that size, making it slightly larger than London’s financial heart, the City, and bigger than Uruk throughout most of the 4th millennium BC.

Trypillians made beautiful clay sculptures, including this figurinePictures from History/Bridgeman

Although sizable, the megasites weren’t densely populated. They were laid out concentrically, with houses made of wattle and daub lining ring roads circling a large central space. The biggest sites had several thousand houses and as many as 15,000 inhabitants – compared with no more than a few hundred people in a typical neolithic village. There is heated debate over numbers, though that, in part, is because it isn’t clear whether the sites were fully inhabited year round. This raises another question: what were these places for?

Some take a traditional view. Archaeologist Mykhailo Videiko at Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Ukraine, thinks the megasites were simply a response to growing population pressure. The Trypillians’ move may have been facilitated by developments in technology, he says, notably the advent of sledges drawn by bulls or other animals. These made it possible to transport food and other resources over a dozen or more kilometres, from existing villages or outlying fields to the new sites. “There were no roads,” he says. “This was a landscape of forests and river valleys.”

Johannes Müller at Kiel University, Germany, views the megasites as essentially overgrown villages – an experiment, yes, but only in scale. The concentric design wasn’t new, he points out: “You see it from around 4800 BC, in older settlements with no more than 50 houses.” But John Chapman and Bisserka Gaydarska at Durham University, UK, couldn’t disagree more. “It’s like saying that an aircraft carrier is a very large yacht,” says Chapman.

For Chapman and Gaydarska, it really was an experiment in social organisation – and the appearance of the megasites reflects this ideological shift. Each was laid out in quarters that radiated from the centre roughly in the shape of pie slices, and further subdivided into neighbourhoods comprising a handful of houses. The overall layout seems to have been imposed from the start, though the quarters took on internal structure gradually, as people moved in. Often, neighbourhoods had their own assembly house, strategically placed on a ring road. A bigger one served each quarter, and there was one, very large meeting house for the site as a whole, near the centre and facing east. These structural subdivisions might have helped contain disputes, says Gaydarska, and the assembly houses could have been where decisions were made and communicated, at a time before writing was invented. “Trypillian sites were basically egalitarian,” says Chapman. “There’s very little evidence of prestige goods or elites.”

Why congregate?
These were cities, in other words, but of a very different kind from those conceived by the hierarchical, slave-owning societies of Mesopotamia a few centuries later. And that being the case, argue Gaydarska and Chapman, our definition of a city needs expanding.

Others don’t go quite as far. Smith calls the megasites “collective settlements”, and suggests we might think of them as immediate precursors of cities, where people who only knew the small-scale, egalitarian village life had their first taste of something bigger and more heterogeneous. “They could be capturing something of that transition,” she says. In fact, she thinks the megasites may have had something in common with Göbekli Tepe in modern Turkey, a building complex which is at least 10,000 years old and seems to have been a place where people congregated periodically to observe rituals. It might have been at such pilgrimage centres that the idea of unfamiliarity – of the need to tolerate and even trust strangers – was first sown, she says.

This is one of several hypotheses that Gaydarska and Chapman explore in a new book, Early Urbanism in Europe. Perhaps the megasites served a purely ritualistic purpose, being managed by a group of “guardians” who welcomed pilgrims over four or five months of the year – or maybe more intensively, over a single month, in the style of the Burning Man festival held annually in Nevada’s Black Rock desert. An alternative idea is that different clans took it in turns to govern, provisioning the site and leading visitors in rituals for a year, before another clan rotated in.

By contrast, Müller and his German colleagues believe the megasites were fully occupied all year round. The evidence is fiendishly difficult to interpret, partly because Trypillians periodically burned their houses down in a controlled way – possibly in a deconsecration rite when they moved out. At Nebelivka, where Chapman and Gaydarska work, for instance, two-thirds of the 1500 houses were torched over its 200 years of existence. Dating techniques don’t offer the precision needed to determine what proportion of the houses were inhabited contemporaneously before being burned. The ecological impact of activities at megasites was light, though, as is clear from detailed analyses of pollen, which can indicate cultivation and forest management, and charcoal in sediment cores taken from surrounding land. But whether that was because the sites were only occupied seasonally or because resources were brought in from elsewhere, is unknown.