---
title: unusual Chess move
id: 47c4a376-593a-49e8-92d4-d6267bd101e8
author_id: 7a9af84a-70c8-4597-8206-c8bb9b10c558
status: draft
date: 2023-02-18T20:55:00.000Z
last_updated: 2023-02-18T21:10:00.000Z
category: notion
---

# unusual Chess move


Thursday 08:50, Wolfgang passed the door as the clock was showing the perfect timing. Celebrating one full year of being on time nearly got him happy. 



Wolfgang had to admit that Massimo, his new hairdresser, was the only one who managed to get the hair cut in exactly 5 minutes. which in turn allowed him, on every first thursdays of the month, to be on time - like today. 

his sisters and parents had tried to say that an extra minute to have the whole head cut properly, instead of only three quarters was worth it…sigh… He had endured his family distorted notion of how important time was his whole life, ever since kindergarten. He had soon given up explaining that the ticking of clocks, was the heart bit of the universe and could not be messed up without many critical side effects.

at 08:55 he passed the security door of the building where he worked. Being on time allowed him to pass behind the guards doing their rounds and not having to push the door himself. 325 steps left to his desk - 150s - so he would perfectly on time to send his first email for 09:00.

Had he not won at the age of 14, the 100 years old prize for optimising some of the oldest AI algorithms, he would not have landed the job of one of the few left software programmer.

His trick was to use historical archives from SETI the long abandoned program ‘Search for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence’ leveraging the pseudo random patterns found over time to better train AI. 

08:57 he sat at his desk. Today, to mark the chime of one year of being on time, he wanted to break the AI chess and Go record as most said it. For him it was more about having software running on time rather than running slow.

08:59 
